ALBERTI, a Multilingual Domain Specific Language Model
for Poetry Analysis
Javier de la Rosa1, Alvaro Perez Pozo2, Salvador Ros2and Elena Gonzalez-Blanco3
1National Library of Norway, Norway
2Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia, Spain
3IE University, Spain
Abstract
The computational analysis of poetry is limited by the scarcity of tools to automatically analyze and scan poems. In a
multilingual settings, the problem is exacerbated as scansion and rhyme systems only exist for individual languages, making
comparative studies very challenging and time consuming. In this work, we present Alberti , the first multilingual pre-
trained large language model for poetry. Through domain-specific pre-training (DSP), we further trained multilingual BERT
on a corpus of over 12 million verses from 12 languages. We evaluated its performance on two structural poetry tasks:
Spanish stanza type classification, and metrical pattern prediction for Spanish, English and German. In both cases, Alberti
outperforms multilingual BERT and other tranformers-based models of similar sizes, and even achieves state-of-the-art results
for German when compared to rule-based systems, demonstrating the feasibility and effectiveness of DSP in the poetry
domain.
Keywords
Natural Language Processing, Multilingual Language Models, Poetry, Stanzas, Scansion
1. Introduction
Poetry analysis is the process of examining the elements
of a poem to understand its meaning. To analyze poetry,
readers must examine its words and phrasing from the
perspectives of rhythm, sound, images, obvious meaning,
and implied meaning. Scansion, a common approach
to analyze metrical poetry, is the method or practice of
determining and usually graphically representing the
metrical pattern of a line of verse. It breaks down the
anatomy of a poem by marking the metrical pattern of
a poem by breaking each line of verse up into feet and
highlighting the stressed and unstressed syllables [1].
Having multilingual tools for scansion and analysis of
poetic language enables large-scale examinations of po-
etry traditions, helping researchers identify patterns and
trends that may not be apparent through an examination
of a single tradition or language [ 2]. By using multilin-
gual tools, scholars can compare and contrast different
poetic forms, structures, and devices across languages
and cultures, allowing them to uncover similarities and
differences and gain a more comprehensive understand-
ing of poetic expression.
SEPLN 2023: 39thInternational Conference of the Spanish Society for
Natural Language Processing
/envel⌢pe-⌢penversae@nb.no (J. de la Rosa); alvaro.perez@linhd.uned.es
(A. Perez Pozo); sros@scc.uned.es (S. Ros);
egonzalezblanco@faculty.ie.edu (E. Gonzalez-Blanco)
/orcid0000-0002-9143-5573 (J. de la Rosa); 0000-0001-7116-9338
(A. Perez Pozo); 0000-0001-6330-4958 (S. Ros); 0000-0002-0448-1812
(E. Gonzalez-Blanco)
©2023 Copyright for this paper by its authors. Use permitted under Creative
Commons License Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0).
CEUR
Workshop
Proceedingshttp://ceur-ws.org
ISSN 1613-0073
CEUR Workshop Proceedings (CEUR-WS.org)However, the analysis of multilingual poetry presents
significant challenges that must be overcome. It demands
a deep understanding of diverse linguistic and cultural
traditions, as each language brings its own unique poetic
conventions and nuances. Researchers and scholars need
expertise in multiple languages to navigate the intrica-
cies of each tradition accurately. Additionally, translation
and interpretation pose complex obstacles in multilin-
gual poetry analysis. Figurative language, wordplay, and
cultural 