Boosting Adverse Drug Event Normalization on Social Media:
General-Purpose Model Initialization and Biomedical Semantic Text
Similarity Benefit Zero-Shot Linking in Informal Contexts
François REMY
University of Ghent
francois.remy
@ugent.beSimone Scaboro
University of Udine
scaboro.simone
@spes.uniud.itBeatrice Portelli
University of Udine
portelli.beatrice
@spes.uniud.it
Abstract
Biomedical entity linking, also known as
biomedical concept normalization, has recently
witnessed the rise to prominence of zero-shot
contrastive models. However, the pre-training
material used for these models has, until now,
largely consisted of specialist biomedical con-
tent such as MIMIC-III clinical notes (John-
son et al., 2016) and PubMed papers (Say-
ers et al., 2021; Gao et al., 2020). While
the resulting in-domain models have shown
promising results for many biomedical tasks,
adverse drug event normalization on social
media texts has so far remained challenging
for them (Portelli et al., 2022). In this paper,
we propose a new approach for adverse drug
event normalization on social media relying on
general-purpose model initialization via Bio-
LORD (Remy et al., 2022) and a semantic-text-
similarity fine-tuning named STS. Our experi-
mental results on several social media datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed
approach, by achieving state-of-the-art perfor-
mance. Based on its strong performance across
all the tested datasets, we believe this work
could emerge as a turning point for the task
of adverse drug event normalization on social
media and has the potential to serve as a bench-
mark for future research in the field.
1 Introduction
Adverse drug events (ADEs) are unexpected and
possibly undocumented negative effects related to
the correct use of a drug, and they have the poten-
tial to result in serious harm to patients. ADEs can
also increase hospitalization costs, reduce patient
satisfaction, and erode trust in the health care sys-
tem. For these reasons, ADEs are a major concern
for patients, healthcare providers, and regulators.
However, detecting and reporting emerging
ADEs (a process known as pharmacovigilance) is
not an easy task (Pappa and Stergioulas, 2019).
Most of the information about ADEs is buried in
Figure 1: Normalization of concepts in the clinical do-
main made large progresses, but social media content
remains more challenging due to informal language.
unstructured text sources, such as medical case re-
ports, social media posts, or online reviews (Audeh
et al., 2020). The two latter sources often con-
tain informal language, abbreviations, slang, or
misspellings, that make machine learning models
unable to accurately extract and normalize ADEs
present within them, a process known as biomedi-
cal concept normalization. Models trained exclu-
sively on clinical data are particularly likely to be
affected (see Figure 1). This is a real concern, as
mapping ADEs to standardized ontologies, such as
MedDRA (Brown et al., 1999) or SNOMED CT
(IHTSDO, 2008), is an important step to facilitate
the analysis and comparison of ADE data across
different sources and domains (Adel et al., 2019).
In a short time span, between the years 2020
and 2022, the field of biomedical concept normal-
ization has seen significant advancements with the
introduction of self-supervised contrastive models.
Originally introduced by Chen et al. (2020) for
computer vision, these models are trained to pro-
duce identical latent representations for multiple
views of a same concept, yet contrasted represen-
tations for each concept. In the biomedical do-
main, these views are usually constructed based on
biomedical ontologies, by pairing canonical names
of a concept with some of their known synonyms.arXiv:2308.00157v1  [cs.CL]  31 Jul 2023State of the art biomedical entity normalization
is now dominated by models relying on this tech-
nique such as BioSyn (Sung et al., 2020), CODER
(Yuan et al., 2022), and SapBERT (Liu et al., 2021).
What makes these models extremely versatile is
that it is possible to encode a new set of target con-
cepts at inference time, which means that using the
same model is possible irrespective of the target
ontology, enabling smooth system updates.
2 Our contributions
2.1 General-Purpose Initialization
All models cited thus far were initialized from lan-
guage models pre-trained on text from the biomed-
ical domain, as this is thought to improve entity
normalization performance somewhat in the clin-
ical domain. In this paper, we propose a new ap-
proach for adverse drug event normalization on
social media by employing BioLORD, a general-
purpose model initialization approach pioneered
by Remy et al. (2022). We hypothesize that its pre-
training on general texts will help tremendously
in understanding the informal language used on
social media, while previous state of the art models
struggled at that specific task, due to the domain
shift between clinical and social media languages.
2.2 MedSTS Finetuning
In addition, after noticing that semantic-text-
similarity finetuning helps achieving better perfor-
mance, we improve this new approach even fur-
ther by incorporating two distinct semantic-text-
similarity (STS) fine-tuning phases to the training,
both before and after the BioLORD pre-training.
We release the improved BioLORD-STS model as
part of this paper, and show that it achieves a per-
formance far exceeding the current state-of-the-art.
3 Methodology
In this paper, we set out to show that general-
purpose models fine-tuned on biomedical defini-
tions perform better, for the task of ADE normal-
ization in the social media, than state-of-the-art
models trained exclusively on biomedical corpora.
Our hypothesis is based on the following obser-
vations derived from the extensive ablation stud-
ies performed in the BioLORD pre-training paper
(Remy et al., 2022): applying the BioLORD pre-
training strategy on a general-purpose model can
help the model learn to generalize across different
writing styles, including non-clinical ones that are
Figure 2: Schema of the pre-training and fine-tuning
steps of the four candidate models: BioLORD-PMB,
BioLORD-STAMB2, and BioLORD-STAMB2-STS2.
rare in biomedical corpora; meanwhile, possess-
ing a strong biomedical knowledge at initialization
time did not appear essential to achieve good per-
formance when using the BioLORD pre-training.
In a final experiment, we also verify that biomed-
ical text similarity is a useful pre-training step to
apply before training BioLORD-type models.
We benchmark all models on four social media
datasets: CADEC (Karimi et al., 2015), PsyTAR
(Zolnoori et al., 2019), SMM4H (Weissenbacher
et al., 2019), and TwiMed (Alvaro et al., 2017),
which are further described in Section 3.3.
Through this extensive benchmarking, we aim
to demonstrate that our proposed approach signif-
icantly outperforms the previous state of the art
in informal contexts, which cover a wide range of
social media activities (such as: forum messages,
online reviews, and tweets).3.1 Candidate Models
To disentangle the impact of the base model ini-
tialization from the impact of the BioLORD pre-
training strategy, we consider two different base
models: STAMB21(Reimers and Gurevych, 2019),
the same general-purpose model used in the Bio-
LORD paper, and PubMedBERT (Gu et al., 2020),
a robust domain-specific model pre-trained on
medical texts. The resulting models are named
BioLORD-STAMB2 andBioLORD-PMB .
We also analyze the effect of fine-tuning the
models on a medical semantic text similarity task
(STS) in addition to the BioLORD pre-training.
We do so by fine-tuning some of the models on the
MedSTS task (Wang et al., 2020), using the same
hyperparameters described in the BioLORD paper.
The base STAMB2 model is fine-tuned for STS
before applying the BioLORD pre-training. This
model then undergoes a second stage of STS fine-
tuning, resulting in BioLORD-STAMB2-STS2 .
Figure 2 illustrates the differences between the
proposed models.
3.2 Baseline Models
We choose two BERT-based models trained
with contrastive learning strategies as baselines:
CODER (Yuan et al., 2022) and SapBERT (Liu
et al., 2021). They are among the best dataset-
agnostic models for medical term embeddings at
the time of writing. Both of them are trained
on the UMLS ontology (Bodenreider, 2004) and
were tested on several term normalization datasets,
showing promising results. SapBERT was the first
large-scale contrastive model to leverage UMLS
and is based on PubMedBERT. It is trained by us-
ing UMLS synonyms to create contrastive pairs.
CODER, on the other hand, leverages both term-
term pairs and term-relation-term triples.
3.3 Datasets
We evaluate all the candidate and baseline models
using four medical entity normalization datasets
containing ADEs. All of them contain informal
texts coming from different social media platforms.
One of the datasets also contains a subset of formal
samples (TwiMed-PM). We include this subset in
our experiments to verify that all the tested models
perform well on ADE normalization in the clinical
domain too.
1https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers/
all-mpnet-base-v2TheTwiMed dataset (Alvaro et al., 2017) pro-
vides a comparable corpus of texts from PubMed
(abstracts) and Twitter (posts), allowing researchers
in the area of pharmacovigilance to better under-
stand the similarities and differences between the
language used to describe disease and drug-related
symptoms on PubMed ( TwiMed-PM , clinical do-
main) and Twitter ( TwiMed-TW , social media do-
main). Both sets of data contain 1000 samples.
The CSIRO Adverse Drug Event Corpus
(CADEC ) dataset (Karimi et al., 2015) is a corpus
of user-generated reviews of drugs that has been
annotated with adverse drug events (ADEs) and
their normalization. It contains 1250 posts from a
medical forum, which were annotated by a team of
experts from the University of Arizona.
The Psychiatric Treatment Adverse Reactions
(PsyTAR ) dataset (Zolnoori et al., 2019) contains
patients’ expression of effectiveness and adverse
drug events associated with psychiatric medica-
tions, originating from a sample of 891 drugs re-
views posted by patients on an online healthcare
forum.
The Social Media Mining for Health Appli-
cations ( SMM4H ) dataset (Gonzalez-Hernandez
et al., 2020) is a dataset for Adverse Drug Event
(ADE) normalization. It was used in the SMM4H
2020 shared task on ADE normalization. The aim
of the subtask was to recognize ADE mentions
from tweets and normalize them to their preferred
term in the MedDRA ontology. The dataset in-
cludes 1212 tweets containing ADEs.
For each evaluated dataset, we perform zero-
shot entity normalization using a setup identical to
Portelli et al. (2022) with four test splits.
4 Results
We report the zero-shot evaluation results of the
various models in Table 1.
Looking at the results on TwiMed-PM, the sam-
ples coming from the clinical domain, we observe
that almost all of the models have a similar perfor-
mance (between 69.99 and 70.60), showing that all
models (general-purpose or in-domain) can reach a
good performance on formal datasets.
The gap in performance of CODER and Sap-
BERT between TwiMed-PM and all the social-
media datasets highlights the existence of a signif-
icant difference in language distribution between
texts in the clinical domain, and the less formal
texts found in online reviews or social media.TwiMed-PM CADEC PsyTAR SMM4H TwiMed-TW
CODER 65.31 ± 1.85 35.29 ± 1.27 52.40 ± 0.71 33.14 ± 1.28 42.80 ± 2.06
SAPBERT 70.05 ± 1.56 40.42 ± 1.27 64.82 ± 1.36 43.37 ± 1.07 48.29 ± 2.85
BIOLORD-PMB 69.99 ± 1.87 58.23 ± 0.36 60.22 ± 0.84 41.80 ± 2.24 47.14 ± 2.21
BIOLORD-STAMB2 70.44 ± 1.19 58.69 ± 0.97 64.70 ± 0.76 46.51 ± 2.08 48.46 ± 1.53
BIOLORD-STAMB2-STS2 70.60 ± 1.19 60.28 ± 0.80 65.49 ± 0.74 47.33 ± 1.42 50.57 ± 1.72
Table 1: Accuracy@1 of the evaluated models on all the datasets. Datasets are ordered according to the formality of
their language, from more formal (TwiMed-TW) to more informal (SMM4H and TwiMed-TW).
If we focus on the models trained using only
the BioLORD pre-training, we can see that they
perform better than the two state-of-the-art base-
line alternatives across all the datasets. In par-
ticular, BioLORD-STAMB2 significantly outper-
forms SapBERT on CADEC (58.69 vs 40.42) and
SMM4H (46.51 vs 43.37). We also observe that
BioLORD-STAMB2, the general-domain model,
outperforms BioLORD-PMB, the domain-specific
variant, proving that the findings of the original Bio-
LORD paper extend to the social media domain.
Our results also highlight that the newly-
introduced BioLORD-STAMB2-STS2 manages to
move the needle even further (with an average ac-
curacy gain of 1 point with respect to BioLORD-
STAMB2), indicating that priming general-purpose
models (STAMB2) for biomedical text understand-
ing (STS) before and after the BioLORD pre-
training enables to achieve better performance.
On the CADEC dataset in particular, our Bio-
LORD family of models achieves zero-shot accu-
racy@1 of above 60% for Preferred Term classifi-
cation. To the best of our knowledge, this is by far
the best zero-shot performance ever reported for
this dataset.
This seems to confirm that ADE normalization
will continue to move towards self-supervised con-
trastive models, as these models perform well, are
very versatile, and can be used to map concepts
to any new updated ontology at test time without
requiring any retraining. In a field where such mod-
els are expected to continue to thrive, the improve-
ments proposed in this paper should be particularly
of interest to other researchers.5 Conclusion
In this paper, we confirmed that BioLORD is an
effective pre-training strategy for biomedical entity
normalization. We were additionally able to show
that applying BioLORD on general-purpose mod-
els like STAMB2 provides additional benefits, and
that these benefits are more important for sources
originating from social media than from clinical
notes. Finally, we report that STS-fine-tuning of
models both before and after undergoing the Bio-
LORD pre-training can bring additional benefits
even in the ADE normalization task, especially in
the case when the source originates from social
media documents.
Limitations
This paper did not investigate the impact of the pro-
posed pre-training strategies on ADE identification,
the task of finding ADE mentions in a text.
We also did not investigate the impact of fine-
tuning models on the task, although we have
performed some preliminary experiments on this,
which seem to confirm the conclusions for zero-
shot models apply to fine-tuned models as well.
Ethics Statement
The authors do not foresee that their work would
raised any particular ethical concern.