GRDD: A Dataset for Greek Dialectal NLP
Stergios Chatzikyriakidis
University of Crete
name.surname@uoc.grChatrine Qwaider
Chalmers Institute of Technology
name.surname@chalmers.seIlias Koloukousis
University of Leipzig
surname@studserv.uni-leipzig.de
Christina Koula
University of Crete
philp0960@philology.uoc.grDimitris Papadakis
University of Crete
philp0961@philology.uoc.grEfthymia Sakellariou
University of Crete
philp0962@philology.uoc.gr
Abstract
In this paper, we present a dataset for the com-
putational study of a number of Modern Greek
dialects. It consists of raw text data from
four dialects of Modern Greek, Cretan, Pontic,
Northern Greek and Cypriot Greek. The dataset
is of considerable size, albeit imbalanced, and
presents the first attempt to create large scale di-
alectal resources of this type for Modern Greek
dialects.1We then use the dataset to perform
dialect idefntification. We experiment with tra-
ditional ML algorithms, as well as simple DL
architectures. The results show very good per-
formance on the task, potentially revealing that
the dialects in question have distinct enough
characteristics allowing even simple ML mod-
els to perform well on the task. Error analysis
is performed for the top performing algorithms
showing that in a number of cases the errors
are due to insufficient dataset cleaning.
1 Introduction
Standard Modern Greek (SMG) has seen a number
of computational resources being developed in the
last years (see (Papantoniou and Tzitzikas, 2020)
for an overview). However, dialects of Modern
Greek have not received much attention from the
perspective of NLP. One of the reasons for this sit-
uation is the scarcity of dialectal resources that can
be exploited computationally to train Greek dialec-
tal models on NLP tasks. Getting hold of dialectal
data is a costly procedure. However, a number of
Modern Greek dialects have an online presence,
and various sources of this kind of data can be iden-
tified and extracted. For example, Cypriot Greek
(CG) data can be traced in a number of online fo-
rums, social media platforms and blogspot type
posts. For Pontic and Cretan Greek, data are more
difficult to be found online, but a number of sources
1The dataset can be found here:
https://github.com/StergiosCha/Greek_dialect_corpus.can be still identified, mainly pertaining to tradi-
tional story narrations, song lyrics, older literary
texts in the dialect, as well as attempts to translate
classical texts into the dialect. Similar considera-
tions apply for the Northern varieties.
In this paper, we try to identify the places where
dialectal data can be found freely on the internet
for four dialects of MG. When this is done, we
extract the data, and lightly pre-process them. We
end up with a quite substantial dataset, albeit an
imbalanced one: 2.3m words from CG, 880k words
for Cretan, 282k from Pontic, and 35k words from
Northern Greek. Extra control of the data is done
by extracting a random sample of 10k words per
dialect and asking native speakers of the respective
dialects to rate them w.r.t. validity. Lastly, we
use the dataset for a dialect identification task and
present the results.
2 Related work
Creating datasets for the computational study Mod-
ern Greek dialects has not attracted a lot of atten-
tion and as such, attempts of this sort are rather
sparse. It goes without saying that the task of Di-
alect Identification has not seen more work either,
given this resource sparseness. There is a small
dataset for the Griko (Anastasopoulos et al., 2018)
dialect.2. It is parallel (Italian-Griko) and annotated
with POS tags. Sababa and Stassopoulou (2018)
design a simple Naive Bayes Algorithm to distin-
guish between Standard Modern Greek (SMG) and
Cypriot Greek (CG) data. As part of this project,
they created a dataset of around 7k CG sentences.
Themistocleous (2019) uses a simple DNN to dis-
tinguish between SMG and CG based on acoustic
properties only (in fact, via a single sonorant). The
results present an improvement over classical ML
algorithms. Hadjidas and V ollmer (2015) present
2Griko is a Modern Greek dialect spoken in Southern Italy
(Rohlfs and Sicuro, 1977; Katsoyannou, 1995; Chatzikyri-
akidis, 2010))arXiv:2308.00802v1  [cs.CL]  1 Aug 2023the Cypriot version of the Multi-CAST corpus, a
dataset of annotated spoken texts. Lastly, (Karasi-
mos et al., 2008) present an attempt to provide a
database with linguistic and meta-linguistic corpora
based on recorded dialectal material (505 hours of
recordings).
3 The varieties
We collected data from 4 dialects of Modern Greek:
Cypriot Greek, Pontic Greek, Cretan and Northern
Greek, plus some data from the official Standard
Modern Greek (SMG) variety. A few words about
these varieties are in order.
3.1 Standard Modern Greek
Standard Modern Greek (SMG) is the official lan-
guage of the Greek and Cypriot state. According to
(Mackridge, 1985) (1985) has its basis in the Pelo-
ponnese Greek dialects. This can be traced back
to the Greek war of Independence (1821-9) where
one of the first areas to be liberated was the Pelo-
ponnese, as well as the fact that the Peloponnese
dialects (with the exception of Tsakonian) were the
dialects closer to the written language. This newly
formed variety was further enriched by elements of
the dialects of dominant Greek communities of the
time, notably Greeks from Istanbul and the Ionian
islands. Other factors like compulsory education,
military service, and the the advent of radio and
television “have made Greece into a melting-pot
in which speakers of various kinds of Greek have
gradually sunk their linguistic differenences” as
Mackridge (1985) notes.
3.2 Cypriot Greek
Cypriot Greek is the Greek dialect spoken by Greek
Cypriots, as well as some Turkish Cypriots. The
first evidence of Cypriot Greek comes from a le-
gal text dated in the 14th century (The Assizes).3
Despite being the native language of most (if not
all) Cypriot Greeks in both Cyprus and the dias-
pora, the official language of the Cypriot Greek
state is SMG (Newton, 1972; Tsiplakou, 2009,
2014). This means that modern day CG stands in
a diglossic relationship to SMG (Tsiplakou, 2009,
2014). Tsiplakou (2009) further shows that this
diglossic relationship in modern day Cyprus is be-
tween SMG and an emergent pancypriot Koiné.
3Note that the presence of Greek in Cyprus dates back to
the 11-10th century BC (Arcadocypriot). However, Cypriot
Greek is not an evolution of the Arcadocypriot dialect of
Ancient Greek but rather evolved from Koiné Greek.Cypriot Greek has a number of distinct features
compared to SMG. We indicatively mention the
distinct weak object pronoun positioning system
(Agouraki, 2001; Chatzikyriakidis, 2012), as well
as the use of clefts to express wide focus construc-
tions (Grohmann et al., 2006; Grohmann, 2009).
3.3 Pontic Greek
We use the term Pontic Greek (PG from now on)
to refer to the dialect as it is spoken today in Mod-
ern day Greece, since a form of Pontic, Romeyka
Pontic is still spoken today in some villages of Tra-
bzon and the of area in modern day Turkey (Sitari-
dou and Chatzikyriakidis, 2012; Sitaridou, 2013;
Schreiber, 2018). The roots of PG, similarly all
other Modern Greek dialects (with the exception
of Tsakonika), can be traced back to Koine Greek,
i.e. the form of Greek used during the Hellenistic
years. However, as Mackridge (1987) notes, PG
came to be markedly distinct to the other Greek
dialects probably due to the Seljuk invasion of the
11th century that basically split the Pontus area
from the other areas of the Byzantine empire.4PG
spoken in the Pontus region was not a uniform
dialect but included several sub-dialects. A num-
ber of classifications have been proposed by the
years (Papadopoulos, 1955; Triandafyllidis, 1981).
PG has some interesting divergences from the lin-
guistic structure as found in SMG. Some of them
include the topicalization particle pa(Sitaridou and
Kaltsa, 2014), an across the board enclitic system
for weak object pronouns (Chatzikyriakidis, 2010),
and the allowance of multiple wh-fronting among
other characteristics (Michelioudakis and Sitaridou,
2016).
3.4 Cretan Greek
Cretan Greek is a Greek dialect spoken in the island
of Crete, also derived from Koine Greek (Mack-
ridge, 1985). According to traditional classifica-
tion, the dialect belongs to the south-western di-
alectal group of Greek dialects (Hatzidakis, 1905).
Cretan Greek has some compelling features that
differentiate it among the other Greek dialects. The
most characteristic one is the substitution of palato-
alveolars for palatalized velars (Mackridge, 1985).
The so-called ’Cretan-type’ fronting is a process
in which the articulation is characterized as ’pre-
palatal’, i.e. mid-way between a palatal and an
4PG along with Cappadocian Greek comprise the Asia
Minor Greek dialectal group.alveolar realization (Manolessou and Pantelidis,
2012).
3.5 Kozani/Grevena Greek
This is the form of Greek as it is spoken in the ar-
eas of Kozani, Grevena in the northwestern Greece.
These dialects belong to a bigger group, i.e. that
of the Northern dialects. These also include the
dialects spoken in Thessaly and the Northeast
Aegean, among other places. Some of the character-
istics of the dialects include the use of prepositional
genitives to denote possession (Chatzikyriakidis
et al., 2023) and unstressed mid-vowel raising and
unstressed high-vowel deletion, among other char-
acteristics (Ntinas, 2005; Θαβ´ωρης , 1994).
4 The dataset
We focused on data that are freely available on
the web. These include dialectal data from blogs,
websites, as well as freely available literary texts.
The first step in the collection process involved
the identification and collection of urls by native
speakers of the dialects or people with theoretical
knowledge of the dialects, where such data can be
found. We created four working groups, each fo-
cusing on finding data from the respective dialect
the group was responsible for. We then developed a
number of Python scripts that allowed us to extract
the dialectal text in raw format. We then applied a
number of basic pre-processing steps, in order to
clean the data: firstly, we removed empty lines and
applied a character uniformity command in order
for each row to have approximately the same num-
ber of characters (56,73). Moreover, we removed
special characters, duplicate lines, punctuation, and
extra white spaces. The final form of the dataset
is in csv format lined up two columns, one contai.
Each column ends up with the label of the respec-
tive dialect. The number of words for each dialect
category, after the cleaning process, is shown in
table 1.
Dialect Number of words
Standard Modern Greek 6,5m
Cretan 880k
Pontic 282k
Northern 35k
Cypriot 2,3m
Table 1: The table shows the number of words for each
dialect in the dataset.In order to check the validity of collected data,
we extracted a random sample of 10000 lines for
each dialect and sent it to native speakers of that
respective dialect. These were not participants of
the project. We asked them to evaluate the data
quality of the sample using a scale from 1 through
10 (Table 2) using their dialectal intuitions.
Dialect Avg Score
Cretan 8
Pontic 7.5
Northern 9.5
Cypriot 7
Table 2: The table shows the average score of data
evaluation by native speakers of the respective dialects.
5 Dialect Identification
We used the dataset on a Dialect Identification task.
We tried: a) classic ML algorithms, and b) a neural
network vanilla model, i.e. a BiLSTM. We used
both a) and b) on the full imbalanced dataset, but
also on three balanced datasets, subsets of the orig-
inal that contain 5k, 20k, and 80k lines for each
dialect respectively.
5.1 Classical ML algorithms
We ran a number of ML algorithms using a simple
word-gram language model (both 1-gram and 3-
gram). We see that accuracy for the full dataset
is quite high, which seems to that the models are
able to correctly identify distinctive features for the
dialects and learn to classify them correctly. The
results are reported below:
ML Algorithm Score
Ridge classifier 0.91
Naive Bayes 0.92
SVM 0.91
Table 3: Top-three performing algorithms on the DI task
In order to investigate the effect of data imbal-
ance in the classification we created three versions
of the original dataset with 5k, 20k and 80k lines
respectively. We present the results of the top three
performing algorithms for each dataset below:
We see a steady increase in accuracy for all al-
gorithms as we add more data. With 80k lines per
each dialect we get an accuracy of 0.90 for the NB
model. This is getting close to the performance onDataset/Model Ridge NB SVC
5k 0.76 0.76 0.75
20k 0.82 0.81 0.82
80k 0.89 0.90 0.88
Table 4: Top three performing algorithms on three bal-
anced datasets
the original imbalanced dataset (NB performs 0.94
accuracy on the full dataset).
5.2 BiLSTM
Following the relative success of simple ML algo-
rithms in the task, we experimented with a more
elaborate DL model, in particular a vanilla BiL-
STM model, with an 128 embedding layer, two
BiLSTM layers (64 and 32 layers respectively), a
densely connected network with 64 units, relu as
the activation function and, lastly, a final layer with
softmax activation. We run the model using only
two epochs. The results present a very high accu-
racy of 97% and low loss (approximately 10%). In
order to check for model overfitting, we performed
k-fold validation using the same number of epochs.
The results show a decrease in average accuracy as
well as an increase in average loss. However, the re-
sults seem to indicate that the model is generalizing
well to the training data, even though some over-
fitting seems to be at play. The results are shown
in:
Accuracy Loss
BiLSTM 0.97 0.1
k-fold validation 0.935 0.17
Table 5: Comparison of BiLSTM and k-fold
We ran the same model on the smaller balanced
datasets and performed k-fold validation on those
too:
Accuracy Loss
BiLSTM_5000 0.89 0.5
k-fold_5000 0.9 0.32
BiLSTM_20k 0.928 0.21
k-fold_20k 0.922 0.2
BiLSTM_80k 0.94 0.15
k-fold_80k 0.936 0.18
Table 6: Top three performing algorithms for each bal-
anced dataset6 Error analysis and limitations
We took a random sample of 20 miss-classified ex-
amples for each dialect and for each ML model.
The results are quite interesting. In algorithms
where performance is quite low, most of the miss-
classified examples are genuine cases of miss-
classification, where the algorithm has not man-
aged to find enough distinctive features to distin-
guish the dialects. Consider the following example,
a missclassified example from the SGD algorithm:
Text: Αυτοί πόρχουν dαν για καμνιά κούπα πιρ-
νούσαν μ bρουστά τ τουν gαλημέρζαν
Correct Dialect: northern
Predicted Dialect: cypriot
In the above, the classifier clearly cannot distin-
guish between northern varieties and cypriot, even
though the example contains typical features of
northern varieties that do not appear in cypriot
(front vowel raising and front vowel loss). On the
other hand, consider the following:
Text: ότι όλα έχουν τη θέση τους και την αξία
Correct Dialect: Cypriot
Predicted Dialect: Greek
This example represents a miss-classification of
a different kind. The mistake here is due to in-
complete cleaning of the dataset. The example in
question is clearly in Modern Greek that ended up
in the Cypriot dataset. For example it could be part
of a response to a blog post written in Cypriot (the
post) in Standard Greek. In effect, the classifier is
right here, pointing to incomplete cleaning in this
case. In future work, we will use this type of error
analysis based on the DI task to further clean the
dataset and enhance its validity and reliability.
A further limitation of our work concerns the
nature and type of data found in the dataset, in ef-
fect also connecting to the previous issue of data
cleaning. We have created a dataset that is coarse-
grained, in the sense that different varieties of the
same dialect, different genres\registers\varieties
in\of the dialect, have collapsed in one category.
For example, in the case of Cypriot Greek, most
of the data are collected from blog posts, which
correspond to a specific text type, whereas in Cre-
tan, a lot of the data come from translations of
Ancient Greek tragedies and comedies into Cretan,
and musical declamations (mantinades). However,
despite this obvious limitation, we believe that the
dataset can be used as a first basis to create morefine-grained datasets, where these considerations
are taken into account. For the moment, what we
want to offer to the community is a dialectal dataset
that can be used/extended/modified to be used for
dialectal NLP tasks.
7 Conclusion
We have presented a dataset of Greek dialectal
data. In particular, we collected freely available
data from Pontic, Cretan, Northern varieties and
Cypriot, we performed some slight preprocessing
and compiled the first dataset of this size that can be
used for the computational study of Greek dialects.
We performed a simple Dialect Identification task
on the dataset. The results point out to the dialects
having enough distinctive characteristics that can
be traced even by very simple ML algorithms and
eventually perform well on the task. A simple
BiLSTM performs the best beating traditional ML
agorithms even with small amounts of data. The
error analysis suggests that a good portion of error
lies in insufficient data cleaning. We will further
work on the cleaning based on the error analysis
results. We aspire this dataset to be the basis for
further work and tasks on Greek dialectal NLP.
Acknowledgements
We want to thank the following people for their help
with this project: a) Christodoulos Christodoulou
for kindly giving us access to his corpus of Kozani
Greek, b) Michalis Sfakianakis for kindly giving
us access to his translations of numerous ancient
Greek tragedies and comedies into Cretan Greek,
and c) postgraduate students Irini Amaniki, Irini
Giannikouri, Efrosini Skoulataki, Erofili Psaltaki,
Valentini Mamatzaki, Vassiliki Katsouli and Hara
Soupiona for their help in the initial stages of iden-
tifying dialectal data on the net.
