Large Language and Text-to-3D Models for
Engineering Design Optimization
Thiago Rios
Honda Research Institute Europe
Offenbach am Main, Germany
thiago.rios@honda-ri.deStefan Menzel
Honda Research Institute Europe
Offenbach am Main, Germany
stefan.menzel@honda-ri.deBernhard Sendhoff
Honda Research Institute Europe
Offenbach am Main, Germany
bernhard.sendhoff@honda-ri.de
Abstract —The current advances in generative AI for learning
large neural network models with the capability to produce
essays, images, music and even 3D assets from text prompts
create opportunities for a manifold of disciplines. In the present
paper, we study the potential of deep text-to-3D and text-
to-text models in the engineering domain, with focus on the
chances and challenges when integrating and interacting with
3D assets in computational simulation-based design optimization.
In contrast to traditional design optimization of 3D geometries
that often searches for the optimum designs using numerical
representations, such as B-Spline surface or deformation pa-
rameters in vehicle aerodynamic optimization, natural language
challenges the optimization framework by requiring a different
interpretation of variation operators while at the same time may
ease and motivate the human user interaction. Here, we propose
and realize a fully automated evolutionary design optimization
framework using Shap-E, a recently published text-to-3D asset
network by OpenAI, in the context of aerodynamic vehicle
optimization. For representing text prompts in the evolutionary
optimization, we evaluate (a) a bag-of-words approach based on
prompt templates and Wordnet samples, and (b) a tokenisation
approach based on prompt templates and the byte pair encoding
method from GPT4. Our main findings from the optimizations
indicate that, first, it is important to ensure that the designs
generated from prompts are within the object class of application,
i.e. diverse and novel designs need to be realistic, and, second,
that more research is required to develop methods where the
strength of text prompt variations and the resulting variations of
the 3D designs share causal relations to some degree to improve
the optimization.
Index Terms —Large language models, generative AI, text-to-
3D, simulation-based optimization, design optimization
I. I NTRODUCTION
The recent advances in building foundation models [1],
large language models (LLM) [2], and text-to-image models
[3] have a major impact on a variety of fields, such as
natural language processing and understanding, text and image
generation, and human machine interaction. The maturity
and ease of use of these novel models even lead to the
adaptation of business models in some domains e.g., text
writing, software development, and product design. The ap-
plication of foundation models to engineering has been less
discussed compared to other domains. Nevertheless, we see
great potential in how large language models, text-to-image
and text-to-3D models could be used in industrial engineering.
Natural language interfaces between engineers and complex
software systems in computational aided engineering couldimprove their usage and make them more accessible for
younger engineers or for non-experts in general. Furthermore,
text-to-X approaches could improve the interaction between
engineers and computer-aided design (CAD) and engineering
(CAE) systems by offering new ways for generating designs
and realizing design changes (images and 3D objects).
In computational engineering optimization text-to-3D gen-
erative models could be used as unique design represen-
tations. Building on former design data they would allow
the exploration of the design space through language. From
a general perspective, there are many alternative ways to
describe a 3D object. All object representations rely on a
number of parameters that are manipulated so that a certain
object is realized. Traditional object representations are spline
curves and surfaces, which are e.g. parameterized by control
points and knot points. Free-form deformations, which repre-
sent object changes, are particularly suitable for representing
modifications of complex objects especially when combined
with finite element/volume simulations [4]. CAD systems
use complex and specific ways to represent objects, and
computational engineering simulations typically rely on high
resolution meshes (e.g. triangulated mesh surfaces). These
meshes are used for approximating physical equations like the
Navier-Stokes equation for fluid dynamics calculations. The
choice of the representation of an object depends on the how
the representation is used in the computational engineering
process. Recently, also deep learning based representations,
such as (variational) autoencoders ((V)AEs) have been applied
to generate point cloud designs [5], [6]. By modifying the
parameters of the latent space design variations are realized
and processed in downstream applications like simulation-
based optimization. Particularly, for engineering optimization,
the representation largely determines the efficiency of the
optimization and the quality of solutions that can be reached.
Using a representation for design optimization that describes
a 3D-object with natural language offers a very different and
unique approach to generate 3D shapes. Even though the
benefit of having a very intuitive description of objects and
their changes is evident, the quality of text-to-3D models in
the context of design optimization is unknown and needs to be
assessed. Here, not only the meaningfulness of designs for a
given text prompt is of interest, but also the relation between
prompt variations and resulting design variations. Since thearXiv:2307.01230v1  [cs.CL]  3 Jul 2023models rely on curated data sets, it is important to understand
in how far ”novel” designs can be generated. By ”novel”,
here we refer to designs which are different from the training
data, yet realistic for a given application. In an engineering
design optimization framework, we need to ensure that the
generated designs are consistent with the optimization target,
e.g. a prompt including the word ”car” should result in a
vehicle-like geometry, while (subtle) variations like additional
attributes or adjectives result in recognizable variations, e.g., a
”compact car” should be different from a ”sports car” (Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. Examples of car shapes generated using Shap-E based on the prompts
“A car” ,“A sports car” , and “A compact car” .
It is also important to get insights into the transition between
generated designs of similar shapes to ”hallucinated” designs
to identify if a generated design is ”novel”, maybe part
of a larger design group, or if it is an outlier or artefact.
Therefore, in the present paper, we discuss the potential of
multi-modal large language models as representations of 3D
objects for simulation-based engineering design optimization
from a practitioners perspective.
Firstly, we propose a fully automated computational 3D
design optimization framework for vehicle development that
integrates the recently published Shap-E [7] as a text-to-3D
generative model. Secondly, we analyze our optimization
results to identify benefits for interacting with engineering
tools through natural language models. For example, replacing
standard representations, such as spline curves/surfaces or
free form deformations [4], [8], with text prompts has direct
implications not only on the quality of the automatically
generated models but also potentially improves the interpreta-
tion of the characteristics of the optimized design. Although
we use automotive applications in this paper, the methods
and conclusions equally apply to other design optimization
problems such as from aviation, or marine.
The remainder of this paper is outlined as follows: In
Section II, we discuss deep learning models for evolutionary
design optimization, like generative models for text-to-3D
tasks and prompt engineering. Section III details our proposed
design optimization framework with a focus on the different
approaches for representing text prompts. In Section IV, we
demonstrate the application of our framework to a simulation-
based design optimization for the minimization of vehicle
drag coefficients and discuss the results of our experiments.
Section V concludes the paper.II. L ITERATURE REVIEW
In this section, we will describe evolutionary design opti-
mization in engineering with learning-based shape representa-
tions. Then, we highlight the current state in text-to-3D and
text-to-image generative models followed by approaches for
prompt engineering.
A. Geometric deep learning for 3D vehicle optimization
The optimization of the shape of 3D objects is an important
step in product design. For automotive engineering, the shape
of cars is optimized e.g for fuel efficiency, or crash safety. A
computational engineering optimization framework typically
consists of the shape parameterization, i.e., the representa-
tion(s), the optimization algorithm for modifying the shape pa-
rameters and simulation tools for determining the design per-
formance. Many different approaches for representing shapes
have been proposed and all have certain advantages and dis-
advantages. It is important to note that for almost all realistic
engineering frameworks the shape is represented at least two,
realistically even three times: the first representation is used for
the optimization algorithm, i.e., the optimization modifies the
parameters of this representation. The second representation
is used for the simulation algorithm, which usually uses a
high resolution mesh for solving differential equations. The
third representation is finally used for the actual manufacturing
process. When we describe shape representations in this paper,
we mostly refer to the first one, the one whose parameters
are subject to optimization. However, the transition between
the different representations is of high practical relevance and
should not be overlooked in the computational engineering
optimization framework.
The introduction of geometric deep learning architectures
[5] enabled the development of 3D deep-generative models
for engineering tasks. Most of the currently available works
focus on learning compact representations of 3D objects for
shape generation and performance prediction. In [9], Umetani
proposes a system for generating 3D car designs and for
predicting the corresponding aerodynamic performance. The
system is based on a deep autoencoder architecture, where, by
manipulating the values of the learned latent representation,
the user quickly generates 3D car designs and obtains an
estimate of the aerodynamic drag of the shape.
Rios et. al build upon a 3D point cloud autoencoder [6] and
propose an automated framework for car design optimization
based on evolutionary algorithms [10] and multi-task opti-
mization methods [11]. The authors show that the point-based
networks learn variations of local geometric features better
than global transformation methods, e.g., principal component
analysis, which yields better performance in nonlinear design
optimization problems. Saha et. al evaluate point-based (vari-
ational) autoencoders ((V)AEs) with respect to their shape-
generative and performance prediction capabilities [12], [13].
One target is to understand whether V AEs are able to generate
novel yet realistic designs. The authors claim that, compared
to the standard architecture of variational autoencoders, a
proposed regularization of the latent space enables smootherdesign variations with less artifacts, which is beneficial for
3D shape synthesis. However, this comes at the expense
of a reduced accuracy of surrogate models, which learn to
predict the performance of 3D designs using the latent space
representation as input.
Learned design representations have a number of advantages
compared to traditional representations like splines or free
form deformation. For complex shapes, the parameterization
of traditional representations requires an experienced engineer
who balances the freedom of design variations with the dimen-
sionality of the search space. It is not uncommon that during
the search process these representations have to be adapted in
order to increase the design flexibility of a certain part of the
3D object. Apart from the additional effort and the dependence
on the expertise of the engineer, the freedom of generating
truly novel and unique designs is restricted by the choice of the
representation, i.e., by the inherent assumption of the engineer
where in the 3D object successful variations are most likely to
be realized. Of course learned design representations also have
their challenges. Firstly, the flexibility of the representation
depends on the variations in the data set that is used for
training. The capability to extrapolate from the seen data is
unclear and unpredictable. Secondly, representations learned
by deep neural networks are difficult to interpret. Therefore, it
is impossible to interfere during the optimization process or to
insert some design p