arXiv:2307.01659v1  [astro-ph.SR]  4 Jul 2023Pre-main sequence stars
Evgeni H. Semkov1
Institute of Astronomy and National Astronomical Observat ory, Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences, Soﬁa, Bulgaria
esemkov@astro.bas.bg
(Dissertation summary. Accepted on 31.05.2023)
1 Introduction
The dissertation presents result from study of Pre-main seq uence (PMS) stars
that are in the earliest stages of stellar evolution. These y oung stellar objects
are still in the process of formation, and the energy they emi t is produced only
by gravitational contraction. The main results were obtain ed with the tele-
scopes at the National Astronomical Observatory Rozhen, as well as with the
use of archival photographic observations and spectral obs ervations obtained in
collaboration with colleagues from abroad. Our results are obtained by study-
ing the photometric and spectral variability of PMS stars. O ur main goal is to
study the processes of star formation, the formation of circ umstellar disks, the
structure of the circumstellar environment and the interac tion of the star-disk
system. The results of our research have been published in 65 scientiﬁc papers
that have been cited over 300 times.
The photometric and spectral variability of PMS stars is of g reat impor-
tance for modeling star formation processes. On the one hand , photometric
variability allows us to easily detect young objects, since they are character-
ized by rapid variability and in many cases with large amplit udes. On the other
hand, stars form in groups and are physically located in the s ame geometric
space, and several variable objects that are at approximate ly the same stage of
evolution can be observed simultaneously. Comparing star s ystems of diﬀerent
ages can be used to trace the stages of stellar evolution.
2 Photometric and spectral variability as a method to study
physical processes in PMS stars
The physical processes taking place during the formation of stars are extremely
important for the next stages of their evolution. The ﬁnal ma ss of stars accu-
mulates gradually, and accretion from the circumstellar di sk can take several
million years. Meanwhile, the disk is replenished by circum stellar matter left
over from the formation of the protostar’s core. About half t he mass of newly
formed stars is accreted by the time they become observable i n the optical
region as PMS stars. This process takes place during episode s of enhanced
accretion, when the accretion rate from the circumstellar d isk increases by 2-
3 orders of magnitude over hundreds of years (Hartmann &Kenyon 1996).
Circumstellar disc masses are typically less than 1 %of the stellar mass, and
the disc cannot replenish rapidly with new portions of circu mstellar matter.
Therefore, outbursts resulting from increased accretion p robably recur every
few thousand years.
Bulgarian Astronomical Journal 39, 20232 E. Semkov
In the era of all-sky photometric monitoring conducted at mu ltiple wave-
lengths, the literature is replete with reports of recorded objects with large-
amplitude photometric variability. Automated techniques have been developed
to identify bursts of young stellar objects in real time, usi ng machine learning
eﬀorts to distinguish them from other similar events. But due to the wide va-
riety of variability patterns in PMS stars, these objects do not have distinct
light curve patterns that are similar from object to object. Therefore, many
variable phenomena may turn out to be unclassiﬁed cases. The reason is that
diﬀerent physical mechanisms can cause variability with si milar amplitudes
and time scales. High-resolution spectra are needed to prob e the physical state
of the circumstellar disc and accretion processes. They all ow us to distinguish,
for example, between FUor outbursts and other types of varia bility of similar
amplitudes (Semkov &Peneva 2011).
In the optical and near-infrared ranges, the spectra of youn g stars provide
the main information about the temperature of the gas envelo pe. For PMS
stars that have low accretion rates, the optical and infrare d spectra typically
show a stellar photosphere in absorption. As the accretion r ate increases, the
star’s spectrum is dominated by emission components, so it b ecomes impos-
sible to separate the photospheric absorption component. I n extremely strong
outbursts, with very high accretion rates, implying a very h igh luminosity of
the star, the observed spectrum becomes that of the hot inner disk, which is
in absorption, i.e. spectrum of a hot supergiant.
Another main research method that complements spectral obs ervations is
interferometry in the near and mid-infrared regions, which allows very precisely
to determine the parameters of circumstellar disks. This te chnique can help
to reveal the relationship of the structure of the inner part of the disc with
the reasons that give rise to the outbursts. Such photometri c and spectral
monitoring of the youngest protostars, which show signs of e nhanced accretion,
is not yet possible, and this complicates the study of the phy sics of accretion.
The possibility of spectral observations is improving with the development of
observational methods, but the necessary information abou t the most obscured
or deeply embedded young stellar objects is still very insuﬃ cient.
A third very important method of studying PMS stars is the stu dy of
archival spectral and photometric data. Studying the histo ry of variable ob-
jects can contribute signiﬁcantly to explaining the causes of various forms of
variability, such as outbursts, eclipses, or periodic phen omena of variability. It
is also important to study the variability over the entire av ailable range of the
electromagnetic spectrum and to look for correlation betwe en the processes in
the individual areas.
3 FU Ori and EX Lupi type of outbursts
The registered objects that have shown eruptions of the FUor or EXor type
are relatively small in number. In many cases, it is still dis puted exactly what
type of outburst was observed. And there are also cases where an object is
reported as a FUor or EXor, based on just a few observations, a nd then turns
out to actually be another type of object altogether, such as a long-period
variable star or an eclipsing system. The total number of kno wn PMS stars in
which large-amplitude outbursts have been observed is seve ral dozen. There
are several publications in which an attempt has been made to present a list ofPre-main sequence stars 3
objects classiﬁed as FUor stars. For example, the paper by Re ipurth&Aspin
(2010) presents a list of 10 FUor objects and 10 FUor-like obj ects that have
some FUor spectral and photometric characteristics but out burst have not
been observed. In the paper of Audard et al. (2014), a list con taining 10 FUor
objects and 16 FUor-like objects is presented. And in the pap er by Connelley
&Reipurth (2018), a list of 14 FUors and 10 FUor-like objects i s presented.
A comparison of these and similar papers shows that there is n o consensus on
the classiﬁcation of FUor type of objects. Some objects in on e publication are
classiﬁed as FUors and in another as FUor-like objects.
Any case where a large-amplitude outburst of a PMS star is obs erved raises
the question: FUor or EXor? (Ibryamov &Semkov 2021). The main diﬀerences
between these two types are the spectral (the presence or abs ence of certain
spectral lines, their proﬁles and intensity) and photometr ic properties (the
duration and amplitude of the burst and the shape of the light curve). The
spectral variability is explained by the diﬀerent sizes of t he star and circum-
stellar envelope: the absorption regions are signiﬁcantly larger than the star
itself, but the expanding circumstellar envelope is also si gniﬁcantly larger than
the absorption regions around the disc.
Strong photometric variability at maximum brightness is ty pical of EXors
but not for FUors. However, similar short-term dips in brigh tness have been
recorded for several FUor objects. One of the most famous suc h events was
the minimum in the light curve of V1515 Cyg in 1980, a sharp dec rease in
brightness of about 1.5 mag. ( Bband) for several months. This minimum in
the brightness of V1515 Cyg is explained by obscuration from dust material
ejected from the star (Kenyon et al. 1991). A short dip in brig htness (0.4 mag.
inIband) in the light curve of the FUor object V733 Cep was observ ed in
2009 (Peneva et al. 2010). Evidence for a strong brightness v ariability ( ∆V=1.2
mag.) during the time of maximum light during the period from 1986 to 1992
is documented in our photometric study of another FUor objec t V1735 Cyg
(Peneva et al. 2009).
The large-amplitude variability of FUors may result from th e superposi-
tion of the two processes, variable accretion rate and time v ariable extinction
(Semkov &Peneva 2012). In recent papers, such a scenario has been used to
explain the brightness variability of two objects with char acteristics intermedi-
ate between FUors and EXors V1647 Ori (Aspin et al. 2009, Aspi n 2011) and
V2492 Cyg (Hillenbrand et al. 2013, K´ osp´ al et al. 2013). Th e time variable
extinction appears to be characteristic not only of some Her big Ae/Be stars
(UXor type variables), but also a common phenomenon during t he evolution
of all types of PMS stars. In the case of FUor object V582 Aur (S emkov et
al. 2013), we have direct evidence from multicolor photomet ry indicating the
presence of dust around the star.
One possible cause of the variable accretion could be fragme ntation of the
circumstellar disk. Since FUor phenomenon is likely to be re peatable, it is as-
sumed that almost every protostar goes through several epis odes of enhanced
accretion, in which the initial mass of the star increases. S tamatellos et al.
(2012) suggest that periods of episodic increased accretio n may have triggered
the initial fragmentation of the circumstellar disc. In the early stages of stel-
lar evolution, disk fragmentation is not possible and accre tion onto the stellar
surface is assumed to proceed at a constant rate. After sever al episodic in-4 E. Semkov
creases in the accretion rate, the circumstellar disk gradu ally fragments and
thus prevents new outbursts of FUor type, or at least changes their parame-
ters. Therefore, it can be assumed that the outbursts of FUor s, during diﬀerent
periods of the stellar evolution, can vary in amplitude, dur ation and shape of
the light curve, caused by the diﬀerent fragmentation state of the disk. Strong
accretion bursts can also trigger a mechanism to form planet s of various masses
inside the circumstellar disk.
The photometric data we collected conﬁrm the diversity in th e shape and
type of light curves of FUor objects. Our knowledge of the pro cesses occur-
ring during FUor type of outbursts is still incomplete, and m ore data need to
be collected from regular photometric and spectral monitor ing. Attempts to
classify FUor objects based on their photometric propertie s have so far been
unsuccessful due to the small number of objects of this type. A comparison of
the light curves of known FUors show that they are very diﬀere nt from each
other and very rarely repeated. Even the ﬁrst three ’classic al’ FUors (FU Ori,
V1057 Cyg and V1515 Cyg) show very diﬀerent rates of brightne ss increase and
decrease (Clarke et al. 2005). The variety of light curves in creases even more
with the number of well-studied FUors, to which our work also contributes.
As a rule, the light curves of FUors are usually asymmetric, w ith a rapid
increase and gradual decrease in brightness. Some objects s how a very rapid
increase in brightness over several months or a year, such as FU Ori, V1057
Cyg and V2493 Cyg (Semkov et al. 2010, 2012, 2021b, Clarke et a l. 2005,
Kopatskaya et al. 2013). But in other cases, such as V1515 Cyg, V1735 Cyg,
V733 Cep and V900 Mon, the brightness increase can last for se veral years and
even reach 20-30 years (Clarke et al. 2005, Peneva et al. 2009 , 2010, Semkov
et al. 2021a). Usually, the decline in brightness takes seve ral decades and is
very likely to reach a century. But there are objects where a re latively rapid
decrease in brightness is observed. For example, V960 Mon, w here the bright-
ness decreases by 2 mag. in Vband over a period of about ﬁve years (Takagi et
al. 2020). In our study of the FUor object V582 Aur, we have obs erved three
deep minimums of the star’s brightness of about 3 mag. ( Rband), separated
by periods of about ﬁve years (Semkov et al. 2013, ´Abrah´ am et al. 2018).
But there are also objects that for long periods of time, pract ically do not
change their brightness, as in the cases of V1735 Cyg (Peneva et al. 2009)
and Parsamian 21 (Semkov &Peneva 2010). In this respect, the light curve
of the FUor object V733 Cep is unique, with its roughly symmet rical shape
(Peneva et al. 2010). This variety of photometric propertie s strongly supports
the assumption that FUor objects are not a homogeneous group and that the
causes of this phenomenon may be several mechanisms of a diﬀe rent nature
(Vorobyov et al. 2021).
4 Eclipses of UX Ori type
The results of our observations of PMS stars strongly sugges t that UXor type
of variability is a widespread phenomenon (Semkov et al. 201 5, 2019). It is
typical not only of Herbig Ae/Be stars and T Tauri stars from ea rly spectral
types, but also of T Tauri stars of late spectral types and sta rs with relatively
lower masses (Semkov et al. 2017). This result can be explain ed by the low
eﬃciency of star formation where most of the mass of molecula r clouds doesPre-main sequence stars 5
not participate in star formation. This matter remains in th e vicinity of the
protostars, in a number of cases forming inhomogeneous dust clouds moving
in orbit around them. Light curves over long periods of obser vations provide
strong evidence that the deep minimums in the brightness of G M Cep is caused
by obscuration of the star by circumstellar dust structures (Semkov &Peneva
2012).
The inhomogeneity of the dust clouds may indicate an advance d evolution
of the protoplanetary disk in the transition from micron-si zed dust particles
to the formation of kilometer-sized planetesimals (Chen et al. 2012). Accre-
tion, combined with viscous light scattering, heats the cir cumstellar disk of
the young stellar object. As accretion slows and the size of t he dust particles
grows, the disk becomes passive, in the sense that the dust ab sorbs starlight,
heats up and re-radiates in the infrared region. It can be arg ued that both the
light transit time and the observed obscurations by dust par ticles provide a
reasonable model of the absorbing medium. Around the stars t here is a region
with dimensions of several tens of astronomical units, form ing a circumstellar
disk, which is in the form of a ring or a spiral structure. This region is tens of
AU from the star and consists mostly of particles around 10 µm or larger.
5 Weak line T Tauri stars, classical T Tauri stars and Herbig
Ae/Be stars
The most common variability in T Tauri and Herbig Ae/Be stars i s periodic or
aperiodic variability with small amplitudes. In many cases , more than one type
of variability can be observed on the same star. Periodic var iability in most
cases is explained by the presence of spots of reduced temper ature, which are
located on the star surface. The presence of such spots, by an alogy with the
Sun, is the result of magnetic activity. By examining the ampl itude of the
observed variability, we can determine the intensity of the magnetic ﬁeld and
the location of the spots. The results obtained for some of th e objects in this
dissertation show that such cool spots can persist for sever al years, as we do
not observe a change in ephemeris, or a large change in amplit ude, between
individual rotation periods (Poljanˇ ci´ c Beljan et al. 2014 , Ibryamov et al. 2015).
Large-amplitude periodicity in PMS stars is usually observ ed in very few
cases and is usually associated with the presence of hot spot s due to accretion
from the circumstellar disk. Usually, instabilities in the disc lead to the for-
mation of a ﬂow directed towards the surface of the star and or iented along
the magnetic ﬁeld lines. Spots on the stellar surface that ha ve a decreased or
increased temperature can migrate along the stellar coordi nates and change
their area and temperature. This process is demonstrated by examples of sev-
eral T Tauri stars with weak lines in the IC 348 region, for whi ch periodicity
is available, but the light curves for diﬀerent rotation per iods have a diﬀerent
shape (Nordhagen et al. 2016). Based on our observations, we w ould not be
able to register such a change in the shape of the light curve, and the programs
we used would show a lack of periodicity. The reason is that ou r data do not
have a dense coverage of several hours of observations on con secutive nights,
but are scattered over long periods of time.
Acknowledgments: This work was partly supported by the Bulgarian Scien-
tiﬁc Research Fund of the Ministry of Education and Science u nder the grants6 E. Semkov
DN 08-1/2016 and DN 18-13/2017. The authors thank the Direct or of Skinakas
Observatory Prof. I. Papamastorakis and Prof. I. Papadakis for the award of
telescope time. This research has made use of the NASA’s Astr ophysics Data
System Abstract Service, the SIMBAD database and the VizieR c atalogue
access tool, operated at CDS, Strasbourg, France.
References
´Abrah´ am, P., K´ osp´ 